Welcome to the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction
today, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association. And now,
your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane, Keith Johnson, and David Carson, and this show will be on
time travel.
Thank you.
Usually in anybody's life, there's always been a time when you wish you could
have gone back and done something different. Yes, most science fiction authors
would admit, for instance, Larry Niven himself does, who's written articles on
time travel, that it is impossible. And any author who uses the theme or the
environment of time travel for a story is simply playing, engaging in wish
fulfillment or writing the classic what-if science fiction story, since time
travel obviously seems to be impossible. But recently, there have been authors
who have, or scientists, I should say, who have written on the subject and
developed some fairly interesting ideas. I think, first of all, what I would
recognize about time is that it's not a fixed thing. If we wanted to this
evening, we could walk out and look into the past. Simply by looking at the
stars, we're looking millions of years into the past. So, you know, it's not a
fixed thing. It's something which you can play with, with some scientific
justification.
Einstein's theory of relativity, I believe, indicates that as velocity
increases, time goes more slowly. Of course, that's only a one-way trip. You can
take a trip into the future merely by putting yourself in a rocket ship that can
travel at a sizable fraction of the speed of light. And when you come back to
the Earth, the Earth will have aged perhaps a million years, and you are only
five minutes older if your rocket ship will go that fast. But you can't go back
into the past. You are stuck with that Earth, which will be somewhat unfamiliar.
Well, you're not manipulating time, no, in that sense. You're not really
traveling in it. But haven't there been experiments where they've proven, say,
putting clocks on airplanes and leaving some fixed where time, I mean, it can be
shown. This is a fact. Yes. The time can be slowed down. Yes, they really have.
Take two atomic clocks, put one on an airplane, which flies around the world,
and when the second clock gets back and is compared with the first clock, it's
lost a microsecond, a millionth of a second. Now, you can't do too much with
that, but if you multiply that by a large fraction, a large number, then you can
build a pretty good science fiction story around it, and many authors have.
Well, with that beginning, with that basis in Einstein's theory of relativity,
why can't we perceive, as Dr. Robert Forward has done in his article, "How to
Build a Time Machine", why can't we conceive or imagine of a, say, using a black
hole, which supposedly is so dense, so collapsing at such a tremendous rate of
speed, that time is distorted. Yes. Einstein, for example, views the universe as
a fabric not only of space, but of space plus time, so that if you can somehow
distort that, you can perhaps bend the universe, so to speak, enough so that you
could travel in time. And one way of bending the universe is with a tremendous
gravitational field. In fact, that's what Einstein says gravity is. So in the
vicinity of a black hole, time and space are so distorted, you should be able
to, according to our current equations, be able to go forward or backward in
time, simply by going around a black hole or some kind of condensed heavy object
like that, in a suitable direction at a suitable rate of speed. Now, these are
only equations. The theory says that this might be the case. It still has to be
confirmed. It hasn't, that part of relativity has not been confirmed the way
some of the other things have. But doesn't current physics theory allow, for
instance, for the creation of, say, miniature supernova, miniature black hole,
say, with particle bombardment? Aren't some of the velocities reached by
particles sufficient to, in theory, create a supernova, miniature black hole,
which can be used for time alteration? Not at present. We don't see a way of
creating a miniature black hole. However, some people have thought that in the
original Big Bang, the tremendous explosion that, according to current theory,
created the universe, there might have been some miniature black holes that were
created. And we would not have detected them, because, after all, they are
black, and in the blackness of outer space, you wouldn't be able to see them.
And these might be utilized eventually to travel in time. Let's put it this way.
In theory, if there are such things as black holes, Dr. Forward writes that if
we were able to, assuming a black hole is a collapsing star, a giant star that's
collapsing, it has a velocity, it has a spin, perhaps with an elliptical shape
to it, bulging at the equator, say. He writes that if we could somehow, if we
had the technology, if we had the engineering to induce that bulge to reshape
itself, say, into a donut shape, the middle of the black hole would then become
sort of a time gate. Yes. If one entered it, one would be distorting, traveling
through time. The problem with a normal black hole, just a spherical, collapsed
object, is that when you go into it, you usually cannot get out. And terrible
things happen to you at the middle. We don't even know what, but we know that it
would be pretty drastic. But if you could spin a black hole very rapidly, it
would spin out into a donut, and the center of it would be accessible. And
presumably, possibly, you wouldn't pull yourself apart into your constituent
atoms when you go through the center. I don't know how we could do it. Forward
seems to think that with current technology, we could create a black hole donut.
I think we're quite a ways away from that yet. But he does write at the end of
his article, he does admit, he says, okay, the manipulation of a black hole, or
the time traveling itself with people involved, he says that's probably
thousands of years away. But he does write that perhaps within 100 years, we
would have the technology to send information back in time, say, using, creating
miniature black holes or part with particle bombardments. Or even using
miniature black holes that we happen to stumble across in our exploration of the
solar system. But he seems to think that within 100 years, we can send
information, not people, back into the past, which, of course, could be used to
change the past. It's true. It's a lot easier to send a, say, a gamma ray back
into the past than it would be a gross human being.
Time travel is one of the most recent themes used in science fiction. I think
the reason for that is that the ancient, say the classical world, and some
people, by the way, take science fiction themes all the way back to the Greek
and Roman days. But I don't think they can do that with time travel because the
concept of time in the classical world, say with the Greeks and Romans in the BC
era, was totally different from the one that we have today. They didn't conceive
of time as a progression, as a series of causes and effects. For instance, the
future. To a classical Greek, the future was going to be just about like the
present. The idea of evolution was not part of their worldview. The future would
be the same as the present. The past was also different to them. Today, if a
science fiction author or a creative writer wanted to reproduce something or
write about the past, he may take his hero back into the past, a traveling
process. That would be alien to the Greeks. All they would have to do if they
wanted to see somebody from the past is to say travel to Hades, as Homer had
some of his heroes do. If they wanted to meet somebody who was dead or go over
past events, they would simply meet the person involved by going to Hades. This
is where he would be, his abode. But in the sense of something gone, finished,
done, irretrievable, their concept of time would not allow for that. So the time
travel story was not something that they would use.
From the time when a concept of time as a continuing progression up until the
time that science fiction began to catch on, people did use the concept of time
travel in certain ways. But not as an exploration of time travel as per se by
itself. But they only used it as a means to put their protagonist into some
particular situation or to explore a particular theme. One of the earliest of
these was Charles Dickens' A Christmas Carol, in which Scrooge was taken back to
his past and shown scenes of his early childhood, and then taken into his far
future and shown scenes of what the future would be like after he had died, to
show the contrast between these two, and to show him where he was headed if he
continued on his current path. That same sort of thing was extrapolated on by
Mark Twain in A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court, where a young man
working in a factory was struck over the head. And when he woke up, he was in
ancient England under the reign of King Arthur. And then he brought 19th century
technology into the 14th century and in various ways wrought havoc in King
Arthur's kingdom. Wasn't there the possibility in that book that he was only
dreaming that? Didn't he sort of wake up and enter back into the present? That's
true. It's a wish-fulfillment type story. So in essence, you can't really say
that it was time travel. The method is unimportant. As Keith said, it was simply
the going back, whether it was a dream or a vision or however. I think in many
cases an author might come up with the idea, what if I had a 19th century man in
14th century England, and he had all this advanced technological expertise? What
would he do? What would it be like? And of course, Mark Twain's character went
about and he invented the telephone and steam engines and electrical generators.
And at the end of the story was fighting a terrific battle with Merlin using all
sorts of electric fences and fireworks and magnetic devices to hold the knights
in armor rooted to the spot. Of course, Twain being Twain, he developed a great
deal of humor or satire, cleverness in this story. It was mostly a humorous
novel is the reason he wrote it. Of course, that was Twain's method. But
probably, I think most science fiction commentators, in fact I would say all of
them, are almost unanimous in agreeing that the first modern time travel story
was H.G. Wells, The Time Machine, published in 1895. That's the first time
travel story in which the protagonist uses a device in order to travel through
time. You'd probably say that story would have a social purpose to it. Yes, yes.
As Wells wrote it, he was sort of a commentary on Victorian England of his time.
He was contrasting the upper class with the newly developing middle class and
working class citizens. As the Morlocks in the book, who were the troglodytes,
who lived underground and worked with machinery all the time. And the Eloi, who
lived above ground, were what we would call, I guess, the beautiful people.
We might note also that even though Wells was the first one to really use a
machine for the passage through time, there was no method to the machine. I
mean, there was no physics, no mechanics, no theory behind it. No, just flashing
lights and dials and levers. It looked good, it sounded good. Yes, it looked
good in the movie, too. Right. Yes, a lot of the social commentary was lost in
the movie. Then, of course, I would say that probably some of the best known
modern science fiction novels that deal with time travel would carry forward the
serious purpose that Wells had in his story, The Time Machine. Many modern books
would have a social message or a reason for using the time travel motif. Yeah,
such a book like that might be Pavane by Keith Roberts. That book was a, what if
the Spanish Armada had won that naval engagement and England had been different
than what it is now, and the Catholic Church came in and suppressed technology.
Its timeframe is our present, but their methods of communication and locomotion
are extremely archaic compared to ours. They communicate over long distance
using huge towers that use a semaphore flags and gates for communication, and
they travel or haul heavy loads over long distances using an antiquated version
of steam engine. Occasionally, one runs into a story in which time travel per se
is central to the novel. It is the central feature that is being explored. And
one of the most complex and enjoyable of these was written by the incredibly
prolific author Isaac Asimov back in the mid-50s called The End of Eternity. In
this novel, Asimov sets up a core of time travelers who are trying to improve
the Earth. They can travel through centuries. They can drop into any particular
century, institute some kind of change, come back out into their little
protected universe, which is separate from the main time stream, and see what
happens. If it's a favorable change, according to their lights, then they leave
it in. If not, they can go back and change it. But it turns out in the novel
that society has become stagnant because of this. History is no longer a dynamic
process when you can look at the whole thing. Asimov has his novel ending
optimistically when his hero manages to destroy the entire alternate time stream
and makes time travel impossible. But it is an interesting way of treating time
travel and introduces several new concepts on that theme.
Almost any time travel story has to be based on causation. As in Pavane, The Man
in the High Castle, The End of Eternity. Alterations are made in time, either in
the future or in the past. Something is removed, some cause which changes in
effect. I would say any time travel story has to be based on causation. And some
stories, some novels, are very emphatic in developing that idea. For example,
Sprague de Camp's very well-known book, Less Darkness Fall, deals with a
situation in which the protagonist is somehow transported back to ancient Rome.
I think he was struck by a bolt of lightning. The method wasn't so important
here. He was thinking about Rome for some reason. He was struck by lightning. He
got transported back to ancient Rome. He happened to be an archaeologist. He
happened to be knowledgeable about the classical world. He knew his history
well. He got the idea of making very small changes back in ancient Rome in the
days of its fall. With the idea of preserving civilization. In history, after
the fall of Rome, we have what's called the Dark Ages. The loss of knowledge,
the beginning of barbarism, say a thousand years of darkness. Knowledge was
lost. He initiates very small changes which ensure the retention of knowledge.
The small things he keeps alive that will someday again lead to civilization.
How can he be sure that this is, in fact, what will happen? Well, he doesn't
know for sure. All he can do is perform certain actions with his knowledge of
history, what had happened in the future. And what we assume that the changes he
makes have caused our world to be what it is today. Because of what he did, we
are the way we are. We have civilization again. So he believes that you make
small changes in the past and that can radically change the future. A lot of
authors have pursued this theme. One of the best is a short story by Ray
Bradbury called "A Sound of Thunder". In this short story, Bradbury takes a group
of dinosaur hunters back and they are allowed to kill a dinosaur, take a cut off
its head, bring it forward into the future, back into their present. But to
avoid making any changes that are significant, the only dinosaurs that the
hunters are allowed to kill are ones that are going to die in a couple of
minutes anyway. Scouts have gone back earlier and checked out which dinosaurs
are going to be hit over the head with falling trees or die of old age or
something like that. And they have a path that they must stay on, some kind of
force field path. In the novel, one of the hunters goes back, steps off the path
in a moment of panic and crushes a small butterfly. It's the only change he
makes. But when he comes back, the entire future has been changed. A different
president has been elected. The society has become much more violent and much
more oppressive. And things have changed completely. Not everybody agrees that
this is what's the kind of thing that would happen. But it's an interesting
thing to pursue. I thought the causation in that story was fascinating because
instead of taking what you would assume to be something huge, a big cause,
something like assassinating a Napoleon or keeping a Lincoln from being
assassinated or something. Bradbury takes something so small, simply the
crushing of one butterfly, and shows that such a trivial event can cause the
entire future to be changed.
Another interesting facet of time travel stories is Paradox. And one of the favorite paradoxes
is the grandfather paradox. Let's say your grandfather invented a time machine, but
you hate your grandfather, so you steal his time machine and travel back 60 years and
kill him. But you killed him before he met your grandmother. So therefore you weren't
born, so you couldn't kill your grandfather. And you couldn't have traveled back in time.
A paradox, that's right. A lot of science fiction authors play around with that one.
If you were able to go back into the past, what if you met yourself? Or what if you did
something to yourself back in the past or one of your ancestors that would prevent your
being in the present? I think another paradox, too, would involve the future. If you could
travel into the future and if you could come back, how could you remember what you have
done or how could you bring anything back? The future has not yet occurred.
And if you brought back some information, then you would be changing
the present from what it had been. And this, I think, is the core of many of
these paradoxes. Larry Niven, in his essays, has come up with several
interesting ideas on time travel. One of them being that no matter what a time
traveler does in the past, he can't change the future. If he goes back and saved
Lincoln from being assassinated, then President Lincoln might slip and fall down
the stairs in the Ford Theater when leaving the theater that night and die as a
result of that accident. That's called the conservation of events. A number of
authors have treated this idea. The time stream has a certain amount of inertia,
and it takes a lot of effort to make even small changes in it. Fritz Lieber
wrote a story, I believe it was Lieber, in which he is trying to prevent a
certain person from being killed by being shot in the head. And he goes back and
he changes the past repeatedly, and something happens to cancel his changes.
Finally, he goes back and makes one big change, making it impossible for anyone
to shoot this particular person. And a small meteorite comes down from outer
space and goes through his head, accomplishing exactly the same event.
James B. Hogan, a recent addition to the ranks of science fiction authors, has
written several novels steeply based in science fact, among those being The
Genesis Machine, Inherit the Stars, The Gentle Giants of Ganymede, Two Faces of
Tomorrow, and the novel which we will now look at, Thrice Upon a Time. Thrice
Upon a Time is Hogan's latest book, his fifth novel. The setting is the
highlands of Scotland in the year 2009-2010. And we first meet Sir Charles Ross,
who's a genius in theoretical physics. He's won a Nobel Prize years before, and
he now works alone in his ancestral castle. And he's pursuing a phenomenon he
discovered years before. Well, experimenting with the conversion of mass into
energy, bombarding electrons with sufficient force to annihilate them. Physics
theory says that the energy liberated by the annihilation of mass should be
equal to the mass being annihilated. But in Sir Charles' experiments, it's not.
He finally finds out that a small amount of energy, the inequality, comes about
because a small amount of energy is lost. And he finally figures out where it's
gone. It's gone into the past. And he's now learned to control that lost energy
and send information into the past. He sends this information to himself and
receives it on the machine that he's rigged up for that purpose. As the novel
gets moving, Sir Charles sends for his grandson, Murdoch, who's a bright young
man working in the United States. And he wants Murdoch to help him with his
research. Murdoch arrives, begins to aid his grandfather in his time research,
and meets Anne in a nearby village and falls in love with her. Complications
obviously need to arise, and they do very quickly. Two potential catastrophes
develop, both catastrophes sufficient to wipe out life on the earth. This may
sound like a big coincidence that such huge things could happen in the space of
a few pages, but the book is so realistic we don't really question them. But for
each potential catastrophe, Murdoch alters the past with his grandfather's
machine, averts disaster, but he also changes the present when he does so. The
first catastrophe involves a misfunctioning fusion reactor. The reactor
accelerates particles to such speeds that they become miniature supernovas, then
miniature black holes. And even though they're miniature, they're deadly. They
zing around the earth and punch holes in people and objects. Murdoch sends a
warning into the past on his grandfather's machine. This allows the reactor
people to correct the flaw, and everything seems to be okay except in the new
timeline, the new present, the altered present, which comes about because of
Murdoch's tampering with the past. He doesn't meet Anne. The second potential
disaster comes from a plague, which is beginning because of a deadly virus
spread by mistake from a biological research satellite. An antidote fails
because of another mistake. Murdoch again sends information back into the past,
which removes the mistake, causing the bad antidote. And once again, the world
is saved. So, a new timeline is set up, a new present, the third since the novel
began. This must be where the title comes from, Thrice Upon a Time. In this
altered present, it seems as if Murdoch and Anne will meet and become close
again because of the help of a kitten named Maxwell. So, the book ends on a
positive note, both in the personal life of Murdoch and Anne and on the more
universal plane where these catastrophes have been averted. My reactions to the
book are very positive. I have a great liking for Hogan's, all of his fiction.
If his first five novels are any indication of what he'll do in the future, I
think he'll be one of the greatest names in the field by the time he's done. The
novel illustrates his strongest point, I think, and that's realism. The book is
grounded in hard science and present physics theory to the point where
everything seems possible. You ask, why isn't this being done right now? Why
isn't somebody sending information into the past? It's so plausible, so
meticulously worked out. It seems to me that maybe either he read Forward's
article that we referred to earlier, or Forward has read Hogan's book because
Hogan is writing about the sending of information into the past, small bits of
information into the recent past, which is what Forward said at the end of his
article, we would have the technology to perform within 100 years. This book, I
think, occurs about maybe 40 years into the future. My only criticism is that it
does start slowly. There's a lot of science at the beginning of the book. The
characters engage in dialogue that makes them sound like professors lecturing at
a symposium about theories of physics and so forth. But it does pick up. The
action accelerates. The romantic plot helps. And the reader finds it difficult
to put the book down because he's interested in seeing what will happen and how
it will happen. Overall, I think he's done a very impressive job of making time
travel believable.
This is Daryl Lane. Keith Johnson. And David Carson.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, in conjunction with Odessa College and KOCV-FM.